Big Utilities Are Trying to Deceive Florida Voters With This Anti-Solar Amendment
by Carolyn Auwaerter

Florida’s Amendment 1 is another example of big money polluting our democracy as Duke Energy and others try to block solar energy in the Sunshine State.

Duke Energy Balloon Banner in the US
Duke Don't Block Solar.

This election season, we have seen countless examples of special interests — including oil and gas companies — spending millions of dollars to influence candidates, fund ballot measures, and attack democracy itself.

One of the most egregious is Amendment 71 in Colorado, an attempt to change the rules of the ballot initiative process and make it more difficult for citizens to get initiatives like fracking regulations on the ballot.

But Colorado is far from the only state fighting corporate-backed initiatives to drown out the voice of the people. A similar battle is raging in Florida, and the future of solar energy in the state is at stake.

Big utilities in the Sunshine State are funding Amendment 1, a ballot measure deceptively worded to sound like it would support the expansion of solar when it would actually restrict it. Florida Power and Light, Tampa Electric Company, Duke Energy, and others have donated more than $22 million to Consumers for Smart Solar — the campaign promoting Amendment 1 — with Duke Energy directly contributing $5.7 million.

Funding to Consumers for Smart Solar for Amendment 1 as of Oct. 14, 2016. Courtesy Energy and Policy Institute.

As Samantha Page at ThinkProgress wrote, “Solar companies usually back solar amendments. But they have all lined up solidly against Florida’s Amendment 1 .”

That’s because the amendment language would instead make it easier for utilities to charge fees to solar customers, making it more costly to install solar.

Recently leaked audio from an industry conference obtained by the Center for Media and Democracy and Energy and Policy Institute further revealed that the anti-solar effort is calculated, cynical, and far-reaching.

On the recording, Sal Nuzzo, a vice president at the Koch-funded James Madison Institute, can be heard saying that Amendment 1 is “an incredibly savvy maneuver” that would “completely negate anything they [pro-solar interests] would try to do either legislatively or constitutionally down the road.”

Since the audio was released, Duke Energy and the other utility companies have stayed silent while Consumers for Smart Solar have deleted Twitter and Facebook posts that link them to the James Madison Institute.

Protest at Duke Energy Annual Meeting

The good news is that nearly every major newspaper in Florida has come out against the measure, and a large coalition including environmental groups, labor, and solar companies — and Greenpeace — are telling voters to say no to Amendment 1.

You can help ensure this amendment doesn’t pass by sharing this post with your friends and, of course, voting! Together, we can take back our democracy from big polluters and pave the road toward a renewable energy future.

Nebraskans Are Building Solar Panels to Block the Keystone XL Pipeline
by Mike Hudema

They'll have to go under it, around it, or tear it down to get their dirty oil from Canada to the Gulf of Mexico.

Nebraskans Building Solar to Block KXL
Jim Knopik of North Star Solar Bears, the installer of Solar XL. Photo by Juliana BrownEyes-Clifford.

Environmentalists are sometimes criticized for not talking about solutions enough. The media often portrays people who oppose pipelines as ‘anti-development,’ for instance. The reality, however, is that we can both fight against dangerous pipelines and fight for solutions like renewable energy at the same time — and those fighting the Keystone XL tar sands pipeline just made that point more clear than ever.

Landowners and Indigenous groups are joining together to build solar projects directly in the path of the proposed pipeline. While TransCanada wants to build projects that would harm the land, pose ongoing dangers to the water supplies of millions of Americans, and devastate Indigenous lands, these stewards are building the solutions they want to see Nebraska and the country embrace.

Last week, I had the opportunity to see these projects first-hand.

Solar-Powered Barn
In 2013, land owners, Tribal members and volunteers came together to build a solar and wind-powered barn on land directly inside the proposed route of TransCanada’s Keystone XL pipeline route.

Solar Powered Barn in the Path of KXL

This was the first solution-oriented ‘stake in the ground’ that was constructed in the pipeline’s path. The barn is already producing energy.  In order for TransCanada to build its dirty oil pipeline, it will have to tear down clean energy to do it.

Solar XL
More than three years after the construction of the solar barn, landowners are back at it again planning to build solar projects right in TransCanada’s path throughout the state.

The latest round of solar installations is already up. Last week, landowner and farmer Jim Carlson received approval to plug the clean energy his new solar panels will produce directly into the Nebraska power grid.

First SolarXL Site on land of Jim and Chris Carlson

“I am vehemently opposed to the Keystone XL pipeline mainly because of the properties of the contents of the tar sands oil it will carry,” Carlson said on Monday. “This is not your mother’s crude oil, it is the devil’s, and it can kill. We must be focused on clean, renewable energy and America can get along just fine without this foul concoction they call bitumen that TransCanada wants to pipe across our precious soil and water.”

A crowd-funding campaign for the project has already raised more than $42,000 for more solar stakes to go up and includes plans for a show of ‘solar solidarity’ to other tar sands pipeline fights like Kinder Morgan, TransMountain, and Enbridge Line 3.

Join the movement to stop tar sands pipelines.
These groups are leading their opposition with solutions —  showing the world the type of energy we know we need if we want to avoid runaway climate change. They’re producing energy that protects the land and water, and creates far more jobs then a dirty tar sands pipeline ever will.

It’s time we implemented the landowners mantra — panels not pipelines. Do your part by telling JPMorgan Chase, a major tar sands oil funder, to pull its support for these dangerous pipelines. Take action at the link below today!

Greenpeace: Trump Tax on Solar Panels “Protectionist Posturing At World’s Expense”

In response to the news that Donald Trump will begin imposing a tax on imported solar panels, Greenpeace USA climate campaign specialist Naomi Ages said:

“This is the latest in a destructive series of short-sighted energy decisions by Trump, who seems intent on dragging the United States into the center of a climate death spiral. Instead of supporting a thriving solar economy that could continue grow and create thousands of jobs, he is engaging in geopolitical posturing veiled as protectionism. If Trump really wants to support US industry, he should pass policies that incentivize the new renewable energy future. Unfortunately, all he cares about is propping up the dying fossil fuel industry and squeezing the last bit of profit out of it for his cronies at the world’s expense. The US solar industry grew by 95% in 2016 and employs more than 250,000 people. Trump’s protectionist posturing will cause thousands of these hard-working Americans to lose their jobs.”

Apple Again Shows Commitment to Renewable Energy With Arizona Solar Energy Deal
by Perry Wheeler


Mesa, Arizona - Apple today announced a partnership with Arizona utility Salt River Project (SRP) to create new renewable energy generation to power Apple’s new global data command center. The photovoltaic solar power plant will feed clean power into SRP’s grid that supports the Apple facility, producing up to 151 million kilowatt-hours a year.

Four years ago, Apple committed to power its data centers with 100 percent renewable energy. Since 2009, Greenpeace has benchmarked the energy performance of the IT sector in its annual Clicking Clean report, which is due out at the end of September.

In response to today’s news, Greenpeace Senior IT Analyst Gary Cook said:

“Apple has taken another important step to deliver on its commitment to powering its corner of the internet with 100 percent renewable energy. This deal once again shows that renewables are not just good for the environment, but good for business.

“Greenpeace will be updating our analysis of who is winning the race to build a renewably powered internet in our Clicking Clean report at the end of the month. It is great to see industry leaders like Apple answering their customers’ call for clean energy.”
Inside the People-Powered Movement for 100% Solar Schools
by Caroline Hansley

“From the standpoint of energy … it’s obvious, we know we’ve got to make changes. So I hope that’s something that we as a district can really start looking at strongly and doing … now,” said Board of Education member Xavier Cason.

Just last year in Durham, two schools added solar to their campuses, including on the roof of the Southern School of Energy & Sustainability’s new outdoor classroom. To maximize energy savings and to get hands-on training with solar power, students worked with specialists to install four solar panels on the classroom’s bright red tin roof.

While the 5-kilowatt installation at Jordan High and this demonstration project are small-scale and for demonstration purposes, they have captured the community’s attention and drawn widespread support to go all the way to 100 percent solar energy.

Watch their inspiring story unfold here.
Students built this classroom & helped install the 1 kW solar array on the roof.
Students built this classroom and helped install the 1-kilowatt solar array on the roof.

Schools of the Future, Today
Imagine our schools producing all the energy they will use on site. On a short walk outside for a field trip, teachers could educate students on how to work with solar panels, geothermal, or small wind turbines. On campus, students would get exposure in real-time data collection, job readiness experience, and STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math) skills. It turns out, these schools of the future are here today.


Photo by Repower Our Schools coalition.

Spreading Across the State
A few years ago, just one school in North Carolina could brag about it’s net-positive status — meaning it produces more energy than it uses. Now there are more than three districts in North Carolina with ‘high performing’ or energy-positive school buildings. These districts have seen significant decreases on their electrical bills, achieved through installing LED lighting, energy efficient appliances, and smart building design.

All of these schools have also offset their energy usage with on-site renewable energy production. Some have even created a new revenue stream by selling excess energy back to the grid. During tight budget times, these innovative ideas should not be overlooked. One school even produces 50 percent more energy than it uses!
Students Today, Employed Tomorrow
According to the Solar Energy Industries Association, there are currently more than 188 solar companies in North Carolina, employing 6,000 people. The number of green jobs continues to grow, allowing graduates to plug directly into the rapidly expanding green jobs market.
Some students in North Carolina are now leaving high school certified in Solar PV and Energy Auditing.
Photo by Repower Our Schools coalition.
Switching to Solar to Save Money
Utility rates are projected to rise again this year. According to the Department of Energy, utilities are usually the second-highest expense for school districts, after personnel. Many decision makers face hard choices between cutting instructional services or crucial academic support — both which impact the classroom.

But keeping the lights, heat or air conditioning on, shouldn’t come at the expense of more books and higher teacher pay. Some districts are taking matters into their own hands. By switching to solar, they can save money to supplement the dwindling funding from their state education budgets.

Opportunities for Visionary Students and Schools
Four middle school girls from Neal STEM Academy of Engineering and Design went to an international competition for designing and modeling their school of the future. They designed their school to be net-zero, complete with a floating solar farm, solar sculptures and it even used smart glass technology in the windows. This is a stark contrast to the current state of our schools, that have been underfunded for years.

The school these young engineers envision has a solar farm, solar sculptures, and uses smart glass technology among other innovative features.

What could be possible if every school district began taking the steps necessary to secure a just transition to a clean, renewable energy future for all of their schools? Making that future a reality will take all of us getting involved to create this future we all want to see. Other districts across the country are installing solar and advocating for better energy policies that would ease access to easier financial models for schools.

When schools and communities take the initiative together, things can change faster than you think.

3 Things Your District can do today to save money with solar!

Be a Part of the Solar Revolution
Thankfully, solar on schools is not a new idea. These students are not alone in voicing their desire for solar to be on their school. In fact more than 3,700 schools have solar already. There is a growing statewide and national movement calling for schools and districts to begin making the transition to 100 percent clean electricity.

School Districts Can Save Millions by Switching to 100% Solar

Schools all across the country have been switching to solar to save money and reduce their environmental impact, and North Carolina may be the next state to benefit.

Repower Our Schools
Saving money on energy costs by switching to solar can help schools pay for things like tablets, new textbooks, and additional faculty — all while helping the environment.

This article was originally published by EcoWatch on February 3, 2015 and is re-posted here with permission. 

Two reports, released today by the North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center and commissioned by the Repower Our Schools coalition, found that two North Carolina school districts can go 100 percent renewable.

The North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, based at NC State University, found that Charlotte-Mecklenburg Schools and Durham Public Schools can meet 100 percent of their electricity needs and save millions over the next 25 years by installing solar panels to power their schools immediately.

Reducing energy costs is a smart way to direct more money into the classroom, where it’s needed most. Utility bills are the second largest expense for school districts after personnel costs, according to the U.S. EPA.

With more solar-friendly policies in the state, including third party energy sales and improved net metering, the school districts’ savings would  jump 14 times compared to the current benefits of going solar. North Carolina is one of only a handful of states with a legal gray area that effectively blocks purchasing electricity from anyone but the utility.

Solar policy improvements could save $54.6 million for Charlotte-Mecklenburg Schools and $16.3 million for Durham Public Schools over 25 years, an 11 percent savings over what they pay for electricity now, with minimal upfront costs. The savings over 25 years would be equivalent to 1,357 annual starting teacher salaries for Charlotte-Mecklenburg Schools and 414 for Durham Public Schools, which is a substantially smaller school district.

Here’s an infographic that explains the benefits of third party energy sales and net metering:

Repower Our Schools Infographic
Allowing third party energy sales and improving net metering would make solar energy more affordable for North Carolina schools and increase savings.

Not only does solar save money, it can also be a teaching tool for science, technology, engineering, and math.

“Solar installations at North Carolina schools would bring the jobs of tomorrow into the classroom today,” Dr. Wafa Khalil, a retired science and energy teacher of 23 years based in Durham, said. “Teachers could incorporate solar into the curriculum and let students witness its advantages firsthand.”

The reports recommend that both North Carolina school districts develop plans to move schools toward 100 percent renewable electricity long-term while continuing to make energy efficiency improvements and piloting solar projects today.

Parents, teachers and students who want to see their school districts go solar for the health, environmental and economic benefits can take action by calling on their school boards to transition to 100 percent renewable electricity.

Charlotte-Mecklenburg, Durham School Districts Can Meet Electricity Needs, Save Millions by Going 100% Solar

Charlotte, NC — Two reports by the North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center (NC CETC) released today found that Charlotte-Mecklenburg Schools (CMS) and Durham Public Schools (DPS) can meet 100 percent of their electricity needs and save millions over the next 25 years by installing solar panels to power their schools immediately.

With improvements to solar policies in the state, including the allowance of third party energy sales and upgrades to net metering policy, CMS could save $54.6 million and DPS could save $16.3 million over 25 years, an 11 percent savings without upfront costs using an increasingly common arrangement.

“This assessment shows that it is absolutely possible to meet the electricity needs of both Charlotte-Mecklenburg and Durham school districts with solar installations located at schools,” said Clean Air Carolina Program Director Terry Lansdell. “By doing so we can save schools significant funding over the next 25 years to reinvest in our students, teachers and the classroom.”

The reports, commissioned by the Repower Our Schools coalition, examined multiple scenarios to identify financially attractive options for the districts. Under current policies, the districts could save the most money over the next 25 years by powering schools with ground-mounted PV solar using a partnership-flip financing model, which allows schools to obtain the system after seven years of joint ownership with third-party investors.

Both school districts could see their savings jump 14 times compared to the current benefits of going solar if they are able to utilize enhanced net metering and power purchase agreements through policy improvements. North Carolina is currently one of only five states that prohibits third party energy sales, which enables schools across the country to utilize the more beneficial power purchase agreement model.

“Solar installations at North Carolina schools would bring the jobs of tomorrow into the classroom today,” said Dr. Wafa Khalil, a retired science and energy teacher of 23 years. “Teachers could incorporate solar into the curriculum and let students witness its advantages firsthand.”

The money saved over 25 years with third party energy sales and net metering improvements is equivalent to 1,357 annual starting teacher salaries for CMS and 414 for DPS, which is a substantially smaller school district.

The reports recommend that both North Carolina school districts develop plans to move schools toward 100 percent renewable electricity long-term, while continuing to make energy efficiency improvements and piloting solar projects today.

“We continue to see interest from parents, teachers and students across North Carolina in going solar,” said Greenpeace North Carolina Field Organizer Michael Zytkow. “As the calls for 100 percent renewable energy continue to grow, it is only a matter of time before we see solar powering schools across the state.”

The Repower Our Schools coalition launched in January 2015 to support parents, teachers and students who want to see their schools go solar for the health, environmental and economic benefits. Additional information can be found at www.repowerourschools.com.

To read both reports, please click here: http://www.repowerourschools.com/report/

Additional backgrounder on report findings available upon request.

Green Apple Day at Garinger High School Highlights Solar Learning
by Hanna Mitchell

Check out these photos from a solar site assessment for Green Apple Day at Garinger High School in Charlotte, NC.

October is energy awareness month, and as major buyers of electricity, schools have a lot to gain from going solar. Earlier this month, as part of the national Green Apple Day of Service, Repower Our Schools coalition partners including Greenpeace and Renewable Energy Transitions Initiative teamed up with students in Charlotte, NC from Garinger High School, Providence High School and Central Piedmont Community College to do a solar site assessment at Garinger High School.

Repower Our Schools is an effort to transition school systems in Charlotte and Durham to run on 100 percent renewable electricity. This activity was one of several energy-related activities that members of the Repower Our Schools coalition are coordinating to provide hands-on learning opportunities in energy efficiency and renewable energy to enhance Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM) learning.  

For this activity, members from the Sustainable Technologies Department at Central Piedmont Community College came to Garinger High school to lead an interactive discussion on renewable energy and practical considerations for installing solar panels, before leading the group outside to set up technical instruments called Solar Pathfinders that gather site-specific shading data.

The data gathered from the activity will be used to help the high school students design small, mock solar systems for their school as part of their October Energy Unit.

Check out the photos below for highlights from the event.

Jesus Gonzalez from CPCC explains technical considerations for solar system design.
Students use a Solar Pathfinder to examine site-specific shading.
High school students set up the solar pathfinder at a southern portion of the school–south-facing systems are best-suited to capture the sun’s rays.
DeAndrea Salvador from Renewable Energy Transitions Initiative discusses the growing job market for the renewable energy and energy efficiency sector.
Many thanks to everyone who participated in this day of solar learning.

Americans Rank Coal ‘The Worst’ in New Poll, Support Policies to Boost Solar and Reduce Coal Use
by
A new poll from the University of Texas at Austin shows that large majorities of Americans support renewable energy like solar, while coal is considered “the worst” energy source by more Americans than any other form of energy.

Underground Coal Miner in U.S.
A coal miner after his underground mining shift in West Virginia.

The poll also found that more than three out of four Americans acknowledge climate change is occurring (including most Republicans), and that opposition to coal translates to support for candidates working to move us away from coal.

The press release announcing the poll notes that “52 percent of survey respondents say they are more likely to vote for a candidate who supports reducing coal as an energy source, up from 43 percent in March.” Just 15 percent of those polled said they would be “less likely” to vote for such a candidate.

When those surveyed in the poll were asked to rank energy sources from best to worst, solar was considered the best by 41 percent of Americans (much more than any other), and coal ranked the worst by 40 percent of Americans — although nearly as many, 39 percent, ranked nuclear power the worst. Put another way, more than 60 percent of Americans agree that coal and nuclear are the two worst sources of energy.

(“Wave 1” refers to the first poll taken in this series, in September 2011, while “Wave 9” refers to the most recent poll, conducted in September 2015. It looks like these attitudes toward energy sources haven’t shifted much overall during the last four years.)
In addition to support for candidates working to move us away from coal, these attitudes about energy also appear to translate into support for federal policies promoting renewable energy. When asked whether the federal government should “focus on developing” and “subsidize” different energy sources, most chose renewable energy, while coal ranked lowest for both questions.
Letter to Duke Energy: End Silence on Solar Rollbacks
by Monica Embrey

Today I have sent this open letter to Duke Energy's CEO Lynn Good about her company's recent silence on critical solar policies in North Carolina. This is an urgent situation that could have devastating impacts on our state's solar industry. Read some of the questions we have for Duke Energy.

Solarize Charlotte Project Installation
Today I have sent this open letter to Duke Energy’s CEO Lynn Good about her company’s recent silence on critical solar policies in North Carolina. This is an urgent situation that could have devastating impacts on our state’s solar industry. Read some of the questions we have for Duke Energy below.

Dear CEO Lynn Good,

I am writing you about a contradiction that deeply concerns many North Carolinians. Our question today is simple: if Duke Energy is working towards clean and renewable energy sources, then why has your company remained silent as critical solar energy policies in North Carolina are at risk of being derailed?

While Duke Energy has gone to great lengths to say it supports renewable energy in the media, I have yet to see action from your company in support of critical solar policies that the North Carolina legislature is currently reviewing. Is your company actually behind these attacks and posing the biggest threat to undermine and stall solar in North Carolina?

Yesterday, the North Carolina Senate Commerce Committee passed changes to House Bill 332, Energy Policy Amendments, which would debilitate solar policies that have significantly benefited the state. The bill now moves to the Senate Finance Committee where it is poised to surface for vote today. HB 332 has two major provisions that would weaken our states renewable energy policies: it freezes our state renewable energy goals (RPS) and limits the size of solar farms that qualify for a standard rate. Does Duke Energy support or oppose this clear attempt to undermine the solar industry in North Carolina?

Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard Freeze

First, the act would freeze North Carolinas Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Portfolio Standard (RPS) at 6% renewable power. The NC RPS is intended to increase use of renewable resources in the state by establishing the minimum amount of renewable energy that Duke Energy and other electricity providers in the state must sell in a given year. This legally-established renewable energy goal is currently set to gradually increase over time to meet the overall target of 12.5% renewable power by 2021. The RPS keeps the state on a cleaner path that provides us critical economic growth in the clean energy sectors, helps keep electricity affordable for all North Carolinians, and protects our air and water.

Duke Energy has repeatedly stated that it is in favor of the current RPS. Your own website even states, Public policies such as state-level renewable and clean energy standards, which have been enacted in the majority of states have served to jump-start deployment of critical technologies. These policies provide utilities and non-utility energy providers with the certainty necessary to make investments in new energy infrastructure.

North Carolinas RPS has spurred a whopping $6.3 billion in positive economic impacts to our state and saved ratepayers $162 million to date. Those savings would increase to $651 million by 2029 if we stay the course with the current RPS law. HB 332 would dramatically decrease North Carolina’s commitment to renewable energy and energy efficiency, signaling to innovators and business leaders that North Carolina no longer welcomes their investments and jobs. There are at least 24,000 clean energy jobs currently in North Carolina. We cannot afford to risk jeopardizing the economic well-being of our state.

If Duke Energy is truly a company that champions solar and values the current RPS, the company needs to take immediate action to stop this harmful rollback that is working its way through the legislature. There has been no public indication since this bill was introduced that Duke Energy stands behind RPS in its current form. It is not enough to be vocal in support of solar when its convenient to do so. The solar energy you supposedly stand for is needed now more than ever. Will Duke Energy stand by silently as some legislators attempt to rollback this successful program?

Capping Standard Contracts for Solar Farms

Additionally, HB 332 would lower the size of solar farms that qualify for a standard contract, allowing solar to be installed and sold to Duke Energy at a fixed and fair rate approved by the NC Utilities Commission. Currently, facilities up to 5 megawatts qualify for a standard contract in the state to encourage streamlined investment and construction of solar projects. HB 332 would lower the size of qualifying facilities from 5 MW to a mere 100 KW, drastically reducing the incentive to build larger solar farms. If this change under HB 332 becomes law, the result will likely be significantly fewer solar projects in North Carolina.

Last fall, Duke Energy tried requesting this very same rollback to reduce the size of qualifying facilities for the standard contracts before the NC Utilities Commission–the regulatory body responsible for overseeing the companys operations. Duke Energys efforts were unsuccessful; the NC Utilities Commission reexamined and affirmed the 5 MW size as fair for qualifying facilities in January of this year. The change proposed in the legislature would effectively reverse that decision in favor of the exact numbers Duke Energy unsuccessfully lobbied the commission for last year.

Some reports indicate that Duke Energy is working to rollback current North Carolina solar policies that have successfully increased utility-scale solar. Knowing that Duke Energy lobbied for the exact same reduction from the Utilities Commission and it failed, it seems as though your companys efforts have simply moved to the legislature. What role is Duke Energy playing in lobbying legislators to lower the size of solar farms that qualify for a standard contract?

Solar Leadership is Needed

Duke Energy has poisoned our waterways with its toxic coal ash and, by remaining silent, is currently complicit with those legislators looking to roll back North Carolinas solar energy solutions. Under your leadership Duke Energy has branded itself as a clean energy company, championing the states progress on solar installations. This progress has only been made possible because of our states strong renewable energy laws, including the RPS and standard contract size for qualifying facilities. Duke Energys silence in the legislature seem to tell a different story.

CEO Good, you have an opportunity to take Duke Energy in a new direction. One critical step you can take is to lead the company to embrace solar by taking a public stance in support of our states solar policies. Your voice is needed at this crucial time to stand against the solar rollbacks in HB 332.

Americans want more solar and wind, not coal – Gallup poll
by

Solarize Charlotte Project Installation
Christian Lofton with Renewable Energy Design (RED) Group and Daryl Cox with Sylverster & Cockrum Installers, aligning a panel and tightening the nib clamps. Solarize Charlotte is a grassroots initiative to help make the transition to solar power as affordable as possible.
A new Gallup pollshows that broad majorities of Americans want more emphasis on renewable energy sources like wind and solar, while coal remains least popular. Heres the main table from the Gallup poll:

Gallup poll - overall
As you can see in the table above, the poll shows that a full 79% of Americans want more emphasis on producing energy from solar power, while only 28% want more emphasis on producing energy from coal. Another table shows that while there are some differences between Republicans and Democrats, the overall breakdown is similar when it comes to support for renewable energy and coal. Also noteworthy is that independent voters are even more supportive of solar than average, and less supportive of coal -83% want more emphasis on solar, while just 24% want more emphasis on coal. See the table below:
Gallup poll - partisan breakdown

These numbers hint at a key reason why the coal industrys PR campaign to attack clean air and climate change policies as a war on coal has mostly failed – to a lot of people, it seems like a pretty good idea to move away from a source of energy that pollutes our air and water, fuels climate change, and disrupts communities with coal trains, strip mines, and leaking coal ash pits. In fact, some in the coal industry know this: Luke Popovich, the head of the National Mining Association admitted:

Anyway, war on coal never resonated with much conviction among ordinary Americans. For them, the EPA keeps the air and water clean, their kids safe.

Last week, coal CEO Bob Murray described coal industry public relations as terrible – and while I tend to agree, the broadly negative public opinion about coal is likely a more important factor behind the coal industrys failed PR efforts. Its one thing to sell a deadly and polluting product like coal to Congress (along with campaign contributions to sweeten the deal), but actually shifting public opinion appears to be beyond the coal industrys best efforts.

Similarly, broad support for solar power is surely making it tougher for the utility and fossil fuel industries attacks against solar power, as Mike Brune points out:

The latest round of fossil fuel zombie attacks is coming from big utilities that want to stop the spread of rooftop solar. Just like a zombie horde, they use tactics that are clumsy, somewhat brainless, and yet potentially effective… There’s one big problem with this campaign against rooftop solar. Across the U.S., people love solar power.

One more observation: Gallup compared responses to this years poll to a similar one conducted in 2013. Heres that table:

Gallup poll - change over time
Gallup makes some observations about the apparent trends:
Since 2013, support for “more emphasis” on natural gas production has dropped 10 percentage points and there has been a five-point drop in the percentage who want more emphasis on oil, possibly reflecting that the U.S. is producing more of these two commodities than in 2013. There has been no meaningful change in support for expanding solar power or wind as part of a national energy strategy; the same is true for nuclear and coal energy. (emphasis added)
Their suggestion is that public support for oil and gas development has dropped slightly because more oil and gas is being produced – perhaps because some Americans think the increases in oil and gas development in recent years have been sufficient, and perhaps some have soured as the negative impacts of drilling and fracking for oil and gas become more clear and affect more communities. But heres the thing: renewable energy like wind and solar has also boomed in recent years, while support hasnt weakened at all – and thats in the face of well-funded fossil fuel industry attacks on renewable energy. In fact, seeing a neighbor go solar may just lead to more nearby solar power installations, according to a recent study, as Chris Mooney detailed: The installation of one additional solar photovoltaic rooftop project within the past six months in a given area increased the average number of installations within a half mile radius by .44, or almost one half. Basically, just seeing more solar installations helps convince more people to go solar.
So: coal remains Americans least favored energy source, support for oil and gas appears to have dropped slightly during the oil and gas boom, and wind and solar remain highly popular among all Americans, especially independent voters.
 Wind energy is very popular in Kansas. According to the American Wind Energy Association (AWEA), Kansas’ wind industry employs thousands of people each year as new wind turbines are rapidly constructed. Kansas currently has 800 megawatts of wind energy capacity under construction, on top of almost 3,000MW in existing capacity.

The news gets better. Kansas has enormous potential for more clean energy growth. While Kansas is currently ranked 8th among US states’ current wind energy generation, it has the 2nd most potential of any state, after Texas.

james taylor heartland institute climate change energyDon’t try telling that to James Taylor though. Not the singer-songwriter, but the climate change denier James Taylor you see in the SHOWTIME teaser above. This obscure lawyer at The Heartland Institute has made his cozy career undermining public recognition of how serious global warming is and fighting against policy solutions to climate change. Here’s how that works:

Fossil fuel companies extract, distribute and burn dirty energy like coal, oil, and gas. The companies don’t like the expansion in clean energy competition, an industry that itself is a lot less explosive, corrosive, and polluting (have you seen coverage of the massive, deadly coal mine disaster in Turkey??) Rather than innovate their companies to respond to the needs of the 21st Century, polluting companies like Koch Industries, ExxonMobil, Peabody coal, and Duke Energy are funding a vast, coordinated network of political front groups, fake grassroots organizations, and lobbying firms to kill clean energy incentives in Kansas and other at least 14 other states.

Just two weeks ago, Kansas state politicians narrowly defended the state’s renewable portfolio standard. The RPS law is a major incentive for clean energy jobs, requiring utility companies to gradually phase in electricity sources that don’t exacerbate global climate change or poison the air we breathe and the water we drink.

As reported in the Washington Post, this attack on clean energy was the third within the last two years introduced by Kansas politicians affiliated with the American Legislative Exchange Council (ALEC) or backed by ALEC’s friends in the State Policy Network. Those “friends” includeclimate change deniers at The Heartland Institute, political heavyweights like Grover Norquist, and the Koch brothers’ main political group, Americans for Prosperity.

SHOWTIME’s Years of Living Dangerously will take a closer look at how these front groups and politicians conspired against Kansas’ clean energy industry, siding with fossil fuel billionaire Charles Koch instead of the farmers and wind industry employees who are building the infrastructure of today’s energy landscape. Here’s a longer preview of SHOWTIME’s forthcoming episode about the effort to build wind energy in Kansas and the fossil fuel industry-funded enemies of that effort.

The wind turbine rises: Is high-altitude the future of wind energy?
by Cassady Craighill
41822

ByZachary Davies Boren ofEnergy Desk
Last month, we examined the nascent sector ofWave and Tidal Energy. In the second feature in an Energydesk series, we look at High-Altitude Wind Energy, a potential reserve second in size only to sun radiation.
Wind energy as it is today, both onshore and offshore, has a problem. It misses most of the wind.
Most of the energy which flows around the planet in the form of wind isnt near the ground, or even above the ocean, its in the sky. Where – some research suggests – constant winds could meet the worlds energy needs and cut the cost of power.
Its not surprising people are trying to use it.
According to theAirborne Wind Energy Group, there are over 100 high-altitude wind energy projects in development, chief among them Googles Makani Power from the same Google X labs which brought us Google glass.
A couple of months agoa video of an airborne wind turbine in Alaskacaught the internets imagination. All it took was a few hundred extra metres and some flashy video production to make wind energy sexy.
It the stuff of science fiction so how close are we to putting the ideas into practice?
An apparently much more straightforward technology, offshore wind, isrunning into well documentedproblems – with the logistics of operating in deep waters putting up costs.
But the reward could make the complexity worthwhile.
Not only would airborne technology do without the concrete foundations which drive up the cost of offshore wind but winds at high-altitude have, on average,twice the velocity of those near ground level, with up to eight times the power density.
There is enough energy in high altitude winds to power civilization 100 times over, wrote Professor Ken Caldeira of Stanford University inhis research paper.Other peer-reviewed papersestimate it could reduce the cost of wind energy ten-fold. So if this technology arrives in earnest, it will make a serious impact on the global energy market.

The runners
Many of worlds AWE projects started in the mid-2000s and are now entering the testing stages ahead. So does the future of wind energy look like Altaeros, the lovechild of a sports stadium blimp and a doughnut?
Perhaps not. Whilst the Altaeros BAT is arguably the best known (it shows up top on Google, ahead of even Googles own high-altitude wind project), it is only one of a several technologies in the sector.

All this innovation, will it fly?
Balloon Its under the banner of balloon technology that Altaeros falls. A turbine, designed to be much lighter than those on traditional towers, is lifted by a balloon or blimp to the higher reaches of the sky and kept in place by tethers on which the generated power travels.
Kite Lifted into the higher skies via a kite steering unit, the kite is moved to optimum wind conditions as it sends the acquired kinetic energy to a ground generation station.
Kytoon The fantastically named cross of a heavier-than-air kite and a lighter-than-air balloon. The key benefit of this hybrid is stability; it is lifted by its kite components and maintains its position due to balloon buoyancy.
Tethered Autogen Largely patented by Google, the Autogen is a contraption akin to a wind copter.
Firstly lets visit Fairbanks, Alaska, whereAltaeros Energiesis partnering with Golden Valley Electric Association to launch a 18-month product test in 2015.
“We’re really leaping beyond what you can get with the traditional tower based turbines, and because of that we’re able to produce energy at a much higher capacity factor, said Ben Glass, the MIT graduate who co-founded Altaeros.
Capacity factor, the bane of renewable energy, is a techy way of saying the wind only blows some of the time requiring investment in interconnected grids and backup power.A2009 reportput the average factor for renewables at 33 per cent.
We often compare the BAT against a 100 kilowatt wind tower turbine that’s fairly popular, and which has a capacity factor in the 20 to 25 per cent range. We’re producing energy at a capacity factor of 50 to 65 per cent, which is twice as much. Indeed, its almost as much as some fossil fuel plants.
How exactly does the Altaeros BAT work?
The balloon, filled with helium, lifts the turbine placed in its centre to about 600 metres. The structure is held in place by three tethers, one of which is electro-mechanical and used to transfer the power from the turbine to the ground station. The turbine itself is a lot like the big horizontal axis turbines were used seeing to on towers, with the key difference is that its much lighter.
Remote areas
Glass says Altaeros has a specific market in mind for the BAT: Were developing the product pretty focused on the remote power market, basically any place thats using diesel gen sets. This can be remote communities like you have in Alaska, it can be disaster relief where your main power infrastructure is knocked out, or it could be remote industrial areas.
In those areas high altitude wind will be competing with diesel and Glass says it could prove to be more than three times cheaper.
Whilst cost is always a key consideration, for these remote areas so is access. Part of the Altaeros balloon design is for portability.
For this system, because its a large inflatable structure, it actually packs down very small and were able to ship it in a couple of standard shipping containers basically to any site in the world and set up within a day or two.
Over in California, there isMakani Power, last year acquired by Google X, the tech giants top secret innovations division.

Image: Makani Power, Google
The Makani technology is essentially a tethered aircraft, a sophisticated kite-wing with built-in wind turbines. As is their MO, X wouldnt talk to me about their tech.
The Americans are more focused on airborne generation, said Marcello Corongiu, Programme Manager of ItalysKiteGen, whilst in Europe, we are mostly committed to on-ground generation.
He theorised that American companies tend towards air generation because of the abundance of patents already issued for on-ground generation technology.

Future of electricity’
Is high-altitude the future of wind energy? Corogniu asked, I would go one further and say it is the future of electrical production.
High-altitude wind is an enormous reservoir of energy, the second biggest energy flow after sun radiation. It also highly exploitable without causing environmental issues, asa recent studyfound 1800 terrawatts can be generated without impacting the climate.
Another study, however, claims that extracting any more than 7.5 terrawatts could cause a climate catastrophe.
The German researchers concluded that jet stream wind power does not have the potential to become a signicant source of renewable energy.
But lets get back to KiteGen. It is one of the worlds kite tech big-wigs, with more patents than any other company in the sector (37).
A recent partnership with Saudi Arabia Basic Industries (SABIC) has seen the development of two industrial generators ready for testing this autumn.
Whether that will happen, however, hinges on KiteGens ability to navigate the countrys bureaucratic labyrinth.
The KiteGen technology was conceived as a clever (we hope) generator that controls kites extended on multi-function cables. The system uses climate sensors to inform its management of the kites optimising speed and torque, and also the flight path.

The last year has seen a major redesign – after the firm ran into some problems.
We asked a manufacturer to make a kit for us of about 50 square metres, but we broke it in 10 minutes. The material is not robust enough for bear the high-altitude forces. Our new wing, which has aeronautical and structural integrity, is about 100 square metres.
Mike Barnard of Cleantechnicaearlier this year poked holes in kite-tech, writing that the system is fraught with failure conditions.
And according to Barnard, the semi-flex wing to which KiteGen have moved increases complexity and weight in the air which then increases chances of failure and reduces efficiency.
Low cost
The kite model, says Corongiu, is designed work with the particular conditions of high-altitude where stationary turbines cannot – because it would be too expensive to build them that high.
The success of the sector will be measured in what it does to energy costs, and KiteGen, like its rivals is astoundingly optimistic: We expect a levelised energy cost of less than 20 per megawatt per hour, much less than all present energy technology except for some hydroelectric. Less, in fact, than coal.
And finally, over in Germany, theresSkySails, which is looking towards high-altitude offshore. Using the kite method, SkySails, which is in the design phase of its 1 MW unit, is building its stations to float.
Wind in higher altitudes is more stable and stronger, so theres more to harvest, explained Stephan Wrage, Managing Director of SkySails, And the floating AWE turbines are much easier and cheaper to produce and install than conventional wind turbines.
In his brutally comprehensive assessment of the sector, Barnard said it suffered for lack of harmonious design: As soon as you start engineering an airborne solution to harvest that energy, the compromises strip away the potential bit-by-bit until it just isnt viable in any incarnation so far attempted.
But the wind energy sector has grown more than any other renewable in recent years. These projects have yet to arrive, and they certainly wont be the finished article when they do. There is great potential for the sector in the years ahead; that vast expanse of energy gold above our heads is waiting to mined, and there is an ever-growing number of people and organisations committed to doing just that.

 Cassady Craighill

Years of Living Dangerously: Climate Change Deniers and Kansas Wind Energy
by Connor Gibson
41774

Next Monday, SHOWTIME’s Years of Living Dangerously series will air an episode focused in part on wind energy in Kansas. Teaser clips posted by SHOWTIME review how wind energy has been a lifeline for farmers suffering from increased drought due to climate change. Another features interviews with fossil fuel industry lobbyists who are still peddling climate science denial in Kansas.

Iowas wind energy powers Facebook and Google, but not Microsoft
by David Pomerantz
41751

As the movement to power the internet (and the rest of the world) with renewable energy grows, some technology companies are responding in big ways: Apple launched an Earth Day campaign yesterday highlighting how it is powering its data centers with 100 % renewable energy.
Not to be outdone, Google announced today that it is partnering with its local utility in Iowa, Warren Buffetts MidAmerican Energy, to supply the internet giant with up to 407 MW of Iowas famous wind energy, providing its data center there with well over 100 % renewable energy too.
Google has now contracted for over 1 gigawatt of renewable energy to power its data centers: a stunning number, enough to power over 800,000 US homes.
Facebook, which like Google and Apple has committed to a goal of powering its platform with 100 % renewable energy, also made an agreement with MidAmerican to purchase wind energy from a new wind farm to power its Iowa data center with a renewable resource as well.
Microsoft also has Iowa data centers, and its also growing rapidly there and everywhere. The company announced on Friday that it is doubling its investment in Iowa, spending over $1 billion on a new facility near Des Moines to power its growing cloud computing operation. But unlike Apple, Facebook and Google, Microsoft has not committed to powering its corner of the internet with renewable energy, both in Iowa and more broadly. According to Clicking Clean, the report Greenpeace released earlier this month, Microsoft has thus far relied heavily on buying Renewable Energy Credits (RECs) and carbon offsets, creating the appearance on paper of being clean but not altering Microsofts status quo supply of dirty electricity.
Iowa provides a perfect data point: While wind energy is booming in the state, accounting for a nation-leading 25% of Iowas electricity in 2012, MidAmerican is still powering its grid with a mix of mostly dirty energy sources like coal and gas, so if Microsoft wants to use 100% wind energy to power its data centers there, it will have to get pro-active, as Facebook and Google have done.
Until Microsoft takes similar action, its new facility risks increasing the demand for coal and gas, despite the abundance of clean, cheap wind energy blowing around it every day. Microsoft knows how to buy wind energy; the company signed to sign a long-term purchase agreement for wind power near its Texas data center last year, providing a great roadmap that it could follow in Iowa.
Is Microsoft ready to join major clean energy players like Apple, Facebook and Google, and put its money where its mouth is when it comes to building a greener cloud and internet? Or will it remain more talk than action? The answer may be blowing in Iowas wind.
Google marks its 15th clean energy investment with a Texas wind farm
by Cassady Craighill
41654

ontinuing the company’s impressive record of renewable energy investments, Google announced it will invest $75 million in a wind farm in northern Texas. This marks the company’s 15th investment in clean energy projects, and its second in Texas.
The wind farm, called the Panhandle 2 Wind Farm, will operate outside Amarillo and have the capacity to power 56,000 homes. Google’s first Texas clean energy investment was also a wind farm outside Amarillo. Google expects both projects to begin operation by the end of 2014.
In addition to general clean energy investments like this one, Google plans to eventually operate its data centers from 100 percent from renewable energy.
The Lone Star states produces more wind power than any other US state with more than 40 wind projects.

Spain Wind Power FTW! Cutting Greenhouse Gas Emissions by 23% in 2013
by Meena Hussein
41646
When I think of Spain I usually think of Jos Andrs, Sangra, and the lovely work of architect Antoni Gaud— but now I think of wind power!
Last year’s results show that Spain has dropped their utility-related greenhouse gas emissions by a whopping 23% in 2013 — due to increased renewable energy use, mainly from wind farms and hydroelectric plants.Read all about it in The Guardian.
Which brings me to my question: If Spain can do it, why can’t we?

Microsoft buys wind energy to power its data center as Clippy cleans up its act
by David Pomerantz
41582

The competition among the biggest Internet companies in the world to power their operations with clean energy appears to have a new entrant: Microsoft.
Greenpeace has noted in the past that Microsoft hasnt always backed up its green rhetoric with the same leadership that some of its peers have shown. Last year, we even had some fun with the companys infamous former mascot, Clippy, whom we sent to the companys new stores to ask if they needed help powering data centers with clean energy.
But Clippy has dusted off his act, and he has a new partner in crime now: wind energy.

Microsoft took a big step today when it announced that it will purchase wind energy in Texas to power its data center there, marking its first ever large-scale purchase of renewable energy.
Hopefully todays announcement marks the beginning of a stronger commitment to renewable energy by Microsoft, who had previously relied on purchasing renewable energy credits and carbon offsets to mask a mostly dirty energy supply. Microsoft now has the potential to become one of renewable energys biggest buyers in 2014: the company definitely knows how to do things at scale, and is promising to use revenue from its internal carbon tax to keep purchasing renewable energy like todays deal in Texas.
Still, Microsoft has a long way to go to catch up with some of its peers in the technology sector when it comes to spurring the growth of renewable energy. One of Microsofts biggest competitors, Google, has been buying renewable energy for some time in Texas and around the Midwest, where Microsoft also has data centers and could do the same.
Apple and Facebook have also stepped up, working in places like Iowa, North Carolina and Nevada, where theyve found innovative ways to bring more clean energy online to power the Internet. Google, Apple and Facebook, along with fast-rising companies like Rackspace, Salesforce and Box, have all committed to a goal of powering their data centers with 100 % renewable electricity. Microsoft should do the same, so that users of services like Bing, Office 365 and Azure can know with certainty that todays good news is the sign of much more to come.
